                        README file for VMD 1.8.5
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

What is VMD?            See also http://www.ks.uiuc.edu/Research/vmd/
---------------------------------------------------------------------
  VMD is designed for the visualization and analysis of biological
systems such as proteins, nucleic acids, lipid bilayer assemblies,
etc.  It may be used to view more general molecules, as VMD can read
standard Protein Data Bank (PDB) files and display the contained
structure.  VMD provides a wide variety of methods for rendering and
coloring molecule.  VMD can be used to animate and analyze the trajectory 
of molecular dynamics (MD) simulations, and can interactively manipulate
molecules being simulated on remote computers (Interactive MD).

VMD has many features, which include:
  o No limit on the number of molecules, atoms, residues or
    number of animation frames, except available memory.

  o Many molecular and volumetric rendering and coloring methods.

  o Extensive atom selection language with boolean and algebraic operators, 
    regular expressions, distance based selections, and more.

  o Extensive graphical and text interfaces to Tcl, Tk, and Python 
    to provide powerful scripting and analysis capabilities.

  o Stereoscopic display with shutter glasses, autostereoscopic flat panels,
    anaglyph stereo glasses, and side-by-side stereo viewing.

  o High-quality on-screen rendering using OpenGL programmable shading on
    advanced graphics accelerators.

  o 3-D interactive control through the use of joysticks, Spaceballs,
    haptic devices and other advanced input devices, with support for
    Virtual Reality Peripheral Network (VRPN).

  o An extensible plugin-based file loading system with support for
    popular formats such as AMBER, CHARMM, Gromacs, NAMD, PDB, X-PLOR,
    and many others, as well as automatic conversion through Babel. 

  o Export displayed scene to extenal rendering formats including POV-Ray, 
    Raster3D, Renderman, Tachyon, Wavefront, as well as STL or VRML2 files 
    for 3-D printing.

  o Perform interactive molecular dynamics (IMD) simulations using 
    NAMD, Protomol, or other programs as simulation back-ends.    

  o Integration with the program NAMD, a fast, parallel, and scalable
    molecular dynamics program developed in conjunction with VMD.
    See the NAMD page for details: http://www.ks.uiuc.edu/Research/namd

  o Integration with the BioCoRE collaborative research environment.
    VMD can "publish" molecular graphics scripts to BioCoRE, so that
    collaborators can work together over the internet.
    See the BioCoRE page for details: http://www.ks.uiuc.edu/Research/biocore


What's new in VMD 1.8.5?
------------------------
  General Improvements
    o MacOS 10.4 versions for PowerPC and Intel processors use the
      Apple-provided Tcl/Tk and Python frameworks, and support 
      quad-buffered stereoscopic display on Macs with Quadro 4500
      graphics cards (or similarly capable hardware).
    o New MultiSeq 2.0 multiple sequence alignment plugin replaces the 
      multiple alignment plugin, and allows both structure based sequence
      and pure sequences to be aligned and analyzed
    o Support for VRPN 7.03, lower cost HDAPI-based haptic devices

  User documentation updates
    o MultiSeq 2.0 documentation has been added
    o APBS plugin docs include a short tutorial on coloring solvent
      surfaces by potential
    o Significantly expanded documentation for users interested in developing
      extensions and plugins in Tcl/Tk, Python, and C/C++.
    o Minor improvements and corrections to the VMD User's Guide,
      added documentation for new commands and environment variables.

  User interface changes
    o "RWB" is now the default color scale (previously "RGB")
    o New min/max range controls for isosurface representation isovalue slider
    o The materials menu is now populated with a much larger set of 
      materials by default.
    o OpenGL Shading language compiler diagnostic errors are now printed
      only when the VMDGLSLVERBOSE environment variable is set.

  New representations and display features
    o NewCartoon representations now draw nucleic acid structures with
      ribbons for the backbone and cylinders for each nucleotide 
    o Significant improvements for display of nucleic acids using the existing
      NewRibbons and NewCartoon representations
    o Dynamic reclalculation of bonds can now bet set for several
      atom-oriented representations, for use with trajectory playback
    o Pick points can now be created for user-defined graphics, to allow
      the creation of completely customized graphics and behaviors using
      the scripting interfaces.
    o The built-in color table and menus now contain 32 
      user-modifiable base colors rather than the old limit of 16.
    o Atom labels can now be displayed with user defined format strings,
      and with a defined offset from the atom coordinate. 
    o Added new "RGryB" and "BGryR" color scales for use when coloring
      by potential on white backgrounds
    o New VMDVMDMACENABLEEEXTENSIONS environment variable enables
      performance-oriented OpenGL extensions which trigger bugs 
      on some Mac systems.
    o New VMDSHEARSTEREO environment variable enables an alternative 
      perspective projection mode for improved stereoscopic display
    o New VMDIMMERSADESKFLIP environment variable enables a special
      reversed/reflected stereo projection mode for use with experimental
      displays based on LCD panels, phase plates, and beam splitters.

  New analysis features
    o New 'measure dipole' command for calculating dipole moments
    o New 'measure gofr' command for calculating radial pair distribution
      functions
    o New 'mol reanalyze' command allows one to force VMD to completely 
      re-analyze the molecular structure due to changes in atom names, 
      residue names, bonding/topology, etc.  This is intended to be used by
      structure building tools and other special applications where one wishes
      to change the structure on-the-fly.

  New and improved plugins and extensions
    o New MultiSeq 2.0 multiple sequence alignment plugin replaces the 
      multiple alignment plugin, and allows both structure based sequence
      and pure sequences to be aligned and analyzed
    o New BioCoRE collaboration plugins for chatting, 
      remote file system access, remote job submission, and VMD state exchange
    o New "Virtual DNA" visualization plugin can display a graphical
      representation of DNA according to its helical parameters (no atomic
      structure)
    o New "g(r)" graphical interface for radial pair distribution 
      function calculation and plotting
    o New IR spectral density calculation and plotting tool
    o New representation cloning visualization plugin makes it easy to 
      copy a set of representations from one molecule to another
    o New Palette Tool visualization plugin displays active colors 
      and materials, for test rendering and printing
    o Molefacture plugin now allows structures to be built from scratch using
      a library of fragments and residues
    o New Salt Bridge plugin finds salt bridges that form over a trajectory
    o New CGTools plugin for converting between coarse grain 
      and all-atom models
    o New 'NavFly' mouse-based flying camera navigation plugin
    o Mutator plugin now includes support for free energy perturbation
    o APBS plugin now includes a mobile ion editor, and
      supports job remote execution
    o NAMDEnergy plugin now supports remote job execution 
    o Extended the exectool plugin with support for remote job submission
      through BioCoRE
    o Improved the clipping plane tool user interface
    o Improved Color Scale Bar plugin now has better range controls,
      improved behavior with white backgrounds, and generally more robust.
    o Improved Ramachandran plotting plugin includes a new 3-D time averaged
      histogram display feature.

  New and improved file import and export
    o New VASP plugins read atomic configurations, trajectories, 
      charge density and electron localization function volumetric grids. 
    o AMBER file readers now convert to/from elementary charge units
    o Improved Gromacs plugin now reads TRJ trajectory files
    o Improved column alignment in mol2plugin mol2 file writing routines
    o Improved LAMMPS plugin now reads more structure data out of trajectories

  Bug Fixes
    o Fixed a potential crash when 'measure contacts' was used with a 
      very very small distance parameter, on very large structures
    o Fixed a potential crash in the labels window when molecules were deleted
    o Fixed a memory leak in the atomselect 'moveby' subcommand
    o Fixed a potential crash in the 'atomselect macro' command
    o Fixed the state saving script so that it correctly saves and restores
      the user-defined clipping planes.  Also made the state loader more
      robust so that any color settings errors don't abort the loading
      process, and will continue on with remaining color settings.

Known bugs
----------
  Visit the VMD page for information on known bugs, workarounds, and fixes:
    http://www.ks.uiuc.edu/Research/vmd/


Cost and Availability
---------------------
  BioCoRE, JMV, MDTools, NAMD, VMD and the Structural Biology Software
Database represent the broad efforts of the Theoretical and Computational 
Biophysics Group, an NIH Resource for Macromolecular Modeling and 
Bioinformatics, designed to develop and distribute free, effective tools 
(with source code) for molecular dynamics studies in structural biology.  
For more information, see:
  http://www.ks.uiuc.edu/Research/biocore/
  http://www.ks.uiuc.edu/Research/namd/
  http://www.ks.uiuc.edu/Research/vmd/
  http://www.ks.uiuc.edu/Research/jmv/
  http://www.ks.uiuc.edu/Development/biosoftdb/
  http://www.ks.uiuc.edu/Development/MDTools/

The VMD project is funded by the National Institutes of Health
(grant number PHS 5 P41 RR05969).


Disclaimer and Copyright
------------------------
  VMD is Copyright (c) 1995-2006 the Board of Trustees of the 
University of Illinois and others.

The terms for using, copying, modifying, and distributing VMD are
specified in the file LICENSE. If you use VMD in a way you think is
interesting or novel, we would like to know about it.

The authors request that any published work which utilizes VMD 
includes a reference to the VMD web page:
  http://www.ks.uiuc.edu/Research/vmd/

and/or the following reference:
  Humphrey, W., Dalke, A. and Schulten, K., "VMD - Visual Molecular
  Dynamics", J. Molec. Graphics, 1996, vol. 14, pp. 33-38.


Documentation
-------------
  The VMD Installation Guide, User's Guide, and Programmer's Guide 
are available which describe how to install, use, and modify VMD.  
All three guides are available from the main web site.
Online help may be accessed via the "Help" menu in the main VMD window 
or by typing help in the VMD command window.  This will bring up the VMD
quick help page in a browser, and will lead you to several other VMD help 
files and manuals. 


Quick Installation Instructions
-------------------------------
Detailed instructions for compiling VMD from source code
can be found in the programmer's guide.

The Windows version of VMD is distributed as a self-extracting 
archive, and should be entirely self explanatory.  

The native MacOS X version of VMD is packaged as a disk image and is
extracted by opening the disk image, and dragging the "VMD" application
contained inside into an appropriate directory.

For quick installation of the binary distribution for Unix do the following:
  1) Uncompress and untar the distribution into a working directory.
     In this working directory, there are several subdirectories such 
     as bin, src, doc, data, as well as this README and a configure script.  
     Change to this working directory after the unpacking is complete.

  2) Edit the file 'configure'; change the values for
     the $install_library_dir and $install_bin_dir to a directory in 
     which vmd data files and executables should be installed, be sure
     that you installing into a clean target directory and not overwriting
     an existing version of VMD (which would otherwise give problems):

     $install_bin_dir is the location of the startup script 'vmd'.  
     It should be located in the path of users interested in running VMD.

     $install_library_dir is the location of all other VMD files.  
     This included the binary and helper scripts.  It should not be 
     in the path.

  3) A Makefile must be generated based on these configuration variables
     by running "./configure". 

  4) After configuration is complete, cd to the src directory,
     and type "make install".  This will install VMD in the two
     directories listed above.  Note that running "make install" 
     twice will print error messages because you are attempting to 
     overwrite some read-only files.  Similarly, if you have incorrectly
     specified the target installation directories or attempt to overwrite
     an existing VMD installation, you will get error messages.

  5) When installed, type 'vmd' to start (make sure the
     $install_bin_dir directory is in your path).


Required Libraries
------------------
  VMD requires several libraries and programs for various of its functions.
In particular, it uses GL or OpenGL based 3-D rendering, and will require
that you have the appropriate GL or OpenGL libraries on your system.  
Other programs are required by some of VMD's optional features.
Please visit the VMD web site for more information:
  http://www.ks.uiuc.edu/Research/vmd/

For problems, questions, or suggestions, send e-mail to 'vmd@ks.uiuc.edu'.
  VMD Development Team
  Theoretical and Computational Biophysics Group
  University of Illinois and Beckman Institute
  405 N. Matthews
  Urbana, IL  61801
  TBG: http://www.ks.uiuc.edu/
  VMD: http://www.ks.uiuc.edu/Research/vmd/


README for VMD; last modified August 19, 2006 by John Stone


